---
title: A Quantitative Evaluation of Dense 3D Reconstruction of Sinus Anatomy
  from Monocular Endoscopic Video
pic: /img/screenshot-2023-08-28.png
file: /img/denserecotmi.pdf
---
Abstract — Generating accurate 3D reconstructions from endoscopic video is a promising avenue for longitudi- nal radiation-free analysis of sinus anatomy and surgi- cal outcomes. Several methods for monocular reconstruc- tion have been proposed, yielding visually pleasant 3D anatomical structures by retrieving relative camera poses with structure-from-motion-type algorithms and fusion of monocular depth estimates. However, due to the complex properties of the underlying algorithms and endoscopic scenes, the reconstruction pipeline may perform poorly or fail unexpectedly. Further, acquiring medical data conveys additional challenges, presenting difficulties in quantita- tively benchmarking these models, understanding failure cases, and identifying critical components that contribute to their precision. In this work, we perform a quantitative analysis of a self-supervised approach for sinus recon- struction using endoscopic sequences paired with opti- cal tracking and high-resolution computed tomography ac- quired from nine ex-vivo specimens. Our results show that the generated reconstructions are in high agreement with the anatomy, yielding an average point-to-mesh error of 0.91mm between reconstructions and CT segmentations. However, in a point-to-point matching scenario, relevant for endoscope tracking and navigation, we found average target registration errors of 6.58mm. We identified that pose and depth estimation inaccuracies contribute equally to this error and that locally consistent sequences with shorter trajectories generate more accurate reconstruc- tions. These results suggest that achieving global consis- tency between relative camera poses and estimated depths with the anatomy is essential. In doing so, we can ensure